ITEM 101A (Gosper):

On the theory that continued fractions are underused, probably because
of their unfamiliarity, I offer the following propaganda session on
the relative merits of continued fractions versus other numerical
representations.  For a good cram course in continued fractions, see
Knuth, Volume 2, page 316 [1st Edition; s.4.5.3, p. 339 in 2nd
Edition].  (In what follows, "regular" means that all numerators are
1, and any radix can be read in place of decimal.)

0) pi is 3.  But not really 3, more like 3 + 1/7.  But not
really 7, more like 7 + 1/15.  But not really 15, ... .  So the
regular continued fraction for pi is written 3 7 15 1 292 1 1
... .

1) The continued fractions for rational numbers always come out even,
and rather quickly.  Thus, the number of inches per meter is exactly
100/2.54 or 39 2 1 2 2 1 4.  The corresponding decimal fraction is
39.3700787... has period 42, making it almost impossible to tell if
the number is rational.  (But if our data are ALL rational, the
ordered pair 5000/127 is even more concise.)

2) Quadratic surds, which are of course inexpressible as rationals, are
generally unrecognizable in decimal.  Their continued fractions, on the other
hand, are periodic.  Nth roots of e^2, ratios of Bessel functions, and ratios
of linear functions of these all have regular continued fractions formed by
interleaving one or more arithmetic sequences.  These special properties will
show up regardless of number base.  You might recognize 5.436563... as 2e, but
even Schroeppel might not notice that 6.1102966796... was

   2/3
4 e    - 2
----------
   2/3
  e    - 1

until he wrote it as 6 9 15 21 27 33 ... .

The familiar transcendental functions of rational arguments also have
simple continued fractions, but these are generally not regular and
cannot be reconstructed from numerical values by a simple algorithm,
since nonregular representations aren't unique.  The point is,
however, that numbers like e, pi, sqrt(2), sin .5,
sqrt(7) arctan sqrt(7), etc. can be expressed to unlimited precision
by simple programs which produce the terms on demand.

3) If we define a rational approximation to be "best" if it comes
closer than any other rational with such a small denominator, then
continued fractions give the complete set of best rational
approximations to the value which they represent.  That is, if you
truncate a (regular) continue fraction at any point, then the
resulting rational number is a best approximation.  Furthermore, this
remains true if the last term of the approximation is replaced by any
smaller positive integer other than 1.  All best approximations can be
generated in this manner, in order of increasing denominators (or
numerators).  For example, the approximants to pi = 3 7 15 1
292 ...  are:

 3:   1/1, 2/1, 3/1
 7:   (4/1), 7/2, 10/3, 13/4, 16/5, 19/6, 22/7
15:   (25/8), 47/15, 69/22, 91/29, 113/36, ... 311/99, 333/106
 1:   355/113

...     ...

Note that they are all automatically in lowest terms.  the size of a
denominator is greater than the product of the terms involved and less
than the product of the numbers 1 greater than the terms.  The
approximations are low if the number of terms is odd, high if it's
even.  (Note that if a 1 ends a continued fraction, it should be added
in to the previous term.  Thus, to "round off" a continued fraction
after a certain term, add in the next term iff it is +-1.  In the
above, 4/1 and 25/8 correspond to termination with a 1 and are not
"best"; 355/113 is "best" because the corresponding term really should
be 1.)  The error is smaller than 1 over the product of the
denominator squared and the first neglected term, so that the total
number of digits (numerator and denominator) is usually slightly
smaller than with equally accurate decimal fractions.  355/113 is good
to 7.5 places instead of 5.5, due to the unusually large term (292)
which follows.

4) Numerical comparison of continue fractions is slightly harder than
in decimal, but much easier than with rationals -- just invert the
decision as to which is larger whenever the first discrepant terms are
even-numbered.  Contrast this with the problem of comparing the
rationals 113/36 and 355/113.

5) Regular continued fractions are in 1 to 1 correspondence with the
real numbers, unlike decimal (.5 = .49999...) or rationals (2/3 = 6/9,
sqrt(6) = ?).  Even infinity has a continued fraction, namely,
the empty one!  (Minus and plus infinity are the same in continued
fraction notation.)

6) Each representation favors certain operations.  Decimal favors
multiplication by powers of 10.  Rationals favor reciprocation, as do continued
fractions.  To reciprocate a regular continued fraction, add (or if possible,
delete) and initial 0 term.  To negate, negate all the terms, optionally
observing that

-a, -b, -c, -d ... = -a-1, 1, b-1, c, d ... .

7) The strongest argument for positional (e.g., decimal or floating)
representation for non-integers is that arithmetic is easy.  Rational
number arithmetic often loses because numerators and denominators grow
so large as to require icky multiprecision.  Algorithms for arithmetic
on continued fractions seem generally unknown.  The next items
describe how to arithmetically combine continued fractions to produce
new ones, one term at a time.

Unfortunately, the effort required to perform these operations
manually is several times that for decimal, but the rewards for
machine implementation are considerable (which can also be said of
floating point).  Specifically, these rewards will be seen to be:
unlimited significance arithmetic without multiprecision
multiplication or division, built in error analysis, immorally easy
computation of algebraic functions, no unnecessary computations, no
discarding of information (as with roundoff and truncation),
reversibility of computations, and the terms of the answer start to
come out right away and continue to do so until shut off.

ITEM 101B (Gosper): Continued Fraction Arithmetic

Continued fractions let us perform numerical calculations a little at
a time without ever introducing any error, such as roundoff or
truncation.  As if this weren't enough, the calculations provide
automatic error analysis, and obviate most forms of successive
approximation.  This means we can start with an arithmetic expression
like

   sqrt(3/pi^2 + e)
-----------------------
tanh(sqrt(5)) - sin(69)

and immediately begin to produce the value as a sequence of continued
fraction terms (or even decimal digits, if we should be so
reactionary), limited only by time and storage.  If there are
quantities in the expression which are known only approximately, the
calculation can provide error bounds on the answer as well as identify
the quantity that limited the significance.

All this is possible because each operation (+, /, -, sqrt) in the
arithmetic expression requests terms from the continued fractions of
its operands only when necessary, and consequently produces terms of
its own value as soon as possible.  Numbers like pi and
e and functions like sin and tanh have
continued fraction terms in simple sequences which can be produced by
short programs.  Imprecise quantities can also be programs which
deliver terms until they run out of confidence, whereupon they
initiate special action.  By then, the last guaranteeable term of the
overall expression will have already been produced.

We see then that no calculation is performed unnecessarily, so that,
for example, a subexpression which happened to be multiplied by zero
would never be evaluated.  Also, an operation detecting a deficiency
in two or more of its operands provides a natural mechanism for
allocating multiprocessor resources, should you have some.

Here are the algorithms for the elementary arithmetic operations on
continued fractions.

Let x be a continued fraction

p0 + q0/(p1 + q1/( ... = p0 + q0/x'

where x' is again a continued fraction and the p's
and q's are integers.  We shall call a (p q) pair a
"term" of the continued fraction for x.  Often, only the
p's are mentioned, in which case the q's are
implicitly all 1, and x is called a "regular" continued fraction.

Instead of a list of p's and q's, let x be
a computer subroutine which produces its next p and
q each time it is called.  Thus on its first usage x
will "output" p0 and q0 and, in effect, change
itself into x'.  Similarly, let y be another
procedurally represented continued fraction r0 + s0/y'.  Our
problem will be solved if we can write such subroutines for
z(x,y) = x+y, x-y, x y, and
x/y.  When called upon to output a term of z, the
subroutine might in turn call for (or "input") terms from x
and y until it is satisfied that the unread portions of
x and y cannot affect the pending term of
z.  Then it would output this term and change itself into
z', so that it could produce the next term next time.
Unfortunately, when we try to do this, our expressions quickly
complicate.  Let us preempt this complication by computing instead the
more general function

z(x,y) = (a x y + b x + c y + d) / (e x y + f x + g y + h)

(or

(a  b  c  d) / (e  f  g  h)

for short)

where a through h are integer variables whose
initial values we are free to choose.  Various choices express

      addition:   x + y = (0  1  1  0) / (0  0  0  1),
   subtraction:   x - y = (0  1 -1  0) / (0  0  0  1),
multiplication:     x y = (1  0  0  0) / (0  0  0  1),
      division:   x / y = (0  1  0  0) / (0  0  1  0).

As we shall see, the process of inputting terms of x and
y and outputting terms of z will reduce to replacing
the eight integers a through h with linear
combinations of each other.

When z inputs a term of x, z becomes a new
function of x'.  To see how this happens, substitute p +
q/x' for every occurrence of x in the expression for
z(x,y), then multiply numerator and denominator through by
x':

z(x',y) = (pa+c  pb+d  qa  qb) / (pe+g  pf+h  qe  qf).

If x was rational and has run out of terms, it has in effect
become infinite:

z(infinity,y) = (0  0  a  b) / (0  0  e  f)

If instead we input a term of y by substituting r +
s/y' for every occurrence of y:

z(x,y') = (ra+b  sa  rc+d  sc) / (re+f  se  rg+h  sg).

If y runs out of terms:

z(x,infinity) = (0  a  0  c) / (0  e  0  g)

To output the term (t u), so that z = t + u/z'
(i.e., z' = u/(z-t)):

z'(x,y) = (ue  uf  ug  uh) / (a-te b-tf c-tg d-th).

Thus this basic eight variable form is preserved by all three
operations, which can be performed in any order since they represent
independent substitutions.

For simplicity, let us assume that z will output in standard
form, that is, every u = 1 (regular) and every output term
t >= 1 except perhaps the first.  This means that
z' will always exceed 1 and thus 0 <= u/z' <
1, so that the integer t = z - u/z' must = [z], the
greatest integer <= z.

Since z generally varies with x and y, it
should not output unless [z] is constant for the range of
possible x and y.  We can easily compute the range
of given the ranges of x and y if we represent each
range by the endpoints of an interval (in either order), along with a
bit indicating Inside or Outside.  Thus if z is
in standard form, we can say that z will always be (Inside 1
infinity) (or (Outside -infinity 1)) after the first term.  If
z were to always output its nearest integer instead of is
greatest, then none of the terms after the first would be 1, although
they would probably vary in sign.  In this case, z would be
(Outside -2 2).

Now hold y fixed and examine the behavior of z with
x.  If x is (Inside a b) then
z is (Inside z(a) z(b)) unless the
denominator of z changes sign between a and
b (i.e., z has its pole in this interval), whereupon
z is (Outside z(a) z(b)).  Symmetrically, when x is
(Outside a b) then z is (Outside
z(a) z(b)) unless the signs of the denominators of
z(a) and z(b) differ, whereupon z is
(Inside z(a) z(b)).  This argument still holds with
x and y interchanged.

Now suppose that with y fixed at one if its endpoints,
x constrains z (Inside 1 2), and at y's
other extreme, z(x) is z(y) is (Outside 0 3).
Suppose further that at the two extremes of x, z(y)
is (Inside 1 3) and (Outside 0 2).  Then z(x,y) is (Outside 0
1), the union of the four ranges.  (Outside 0 2) is the widest,
indicating that z will probably get more information from a
term of y than a term of x.  (Topology hackers
should recognize this Inside-Outside nonsense as ordinary intervals in
toroidal space.  The clue is that both plus and minus infinity are
denoted by the empty continued fraction.)

Due to the basically monotonic behavior of z, we can
guarantee that the actual range of z will be the union of
these four ranges, and that this range will be Inside or Outside some
interval.  If it is (Inside z1 z2) and [z1]
= [z2], z can output the term t =
[z1].  Otherwise, z must input a term from
x or y, whichever was associated with the widest of
the four ranges of z.  (Outside narrowness) is wider than
(Outside wideness) is wider than (Inside wideness) is wider than
(Inside narrowness).

Evaluating z on these endpoints may be facilitated by keeping
estimates for the integer variables in floating point.

Even if z doesn't produce a term, narrowing the range of
possible z will still help in computing the range of a
function of z, especially if z gets stuck trying to
output the last term of a rational number resulting from irrational
x and y.  (There is no way to guarantee that
x or y won't eventually deviate, whereupon
z would egest a gigantic term.)

z can produce its value as decimal digits by multiplying by
10 instead of reciprocating, after outputting t = [z]:

z'(x,y) = (10(a-te) 10(b-tf) 10(c-tg) 10(d-th)) / (e  f  g  h).

Strange to say, it is not serious if z for some reason
outputs the terms 7 5 1 when it should have produced 6 9.  As soon as
permitted, it will simply recant with 0 -1 -5 and continue with the
correction -1 9.  The sequence 7 5 1 0 -1 -5 -1 9 is equivalent to 6 9
because b 0 c is the same as b+c.  In order
to undo these computations, z violates the condition (Outside
-1 1) when it is 0 -1 -5 ... .  This condition is obeyed by nearly all
convergent continued fractions after their first term, and its
violation will very probably cause further retractions among the
functions dependent upon z.

This computation reversal trick is also handy for mechanizing and
denoting imprecise quantities.  Instead of 2.997930+-.000003, we have
2 1 481 0 2, meaning between 2 1 481 and 2 1 483.  Similarly, 137 26 0
1 replaces 137.0373+-.0006.

Successive approximations methods benefit considerably from not
requesting terms until needed.  Consider Newton's method for algebraic
roots.  We expect successive approximations to have about twice as
many correct terms each time.  Since the production of these terms
cannot be aided by reading incorrect terms, the additional correct
terms must be produced before the bad ones of the previous
approximation are used.  But this means that there is no need to read
in the bad ones at all.  By feeding back the output terms in place of
the approximation, we get the correct answer directly!  (69% of the
credit for this goes to Schroeppel.)

The basic eight variable form exemplified above by z(x,y) is
not the only form preserved by continued fraction term transactions.
We need only four variables and a single interval check to compute

       a x + b
z(x) = ------- ,
       c x + d

the homographic function of one argument.  On the other hand,
z(w,x,y) (linear in all three arguments) requires
sixteen variables and a twelve way interval check.  Each
of these forms can be solved for x in terms of z
etc. to get a function of the same form.  This is not true of

          2
       a x  + b x + c
z(x) = -------------- ,
          2
       d x  + e x + f

for example, even though this form is also preserved.  This form is
not guaranteed monotone, thus theoretically invalidating the interval
check algorithm, but it hardly every errs.  Even if it did, it would
quickly correct itself anyway.  This form is not only more economical
than z(x,x), it is essential for the success of the Newton's
method feedback trick, which must know when two variables are really
the same one.

By choosing the eight coefficients a through h
properly, it should be possible to rewrite arithmetic expressions as
compositions of considerably fewer of these forms than one for each +,
-, *, and /.  The reader is invited to investigate the problem of
trying to find minimal representations.  Depending on the metric for
minimality, the question can be complicated by allowing higher powers
of x and y.  If the highest powers of x,
y, z, ...  in an invariant form are i,
j, k, .., then the number of integer variables
required for the coefficients (mostly because of all the cross terms)
is

2 (i+1) (j+1) (k+1) ... .

It is awkward in this system to evaluate transcendental functions of
irrational arguments.  The problem is that you may need any number of
continued fraction (or series) terms which, instead of being numbers,
are symbolic functions of x, some infinite continued
fraction.  My suggestion is to represent each symbolic term of the
function by a subroutine which is a function of x and the
next term, with this next term really a dummy until actually called
upon for output, whereupon it replaces itself with a full-fledged term
subroutine which in turn refers to x and a new dummy.

Sad to say, the integer variables in these algorithms do not usually
shrink on outputs as much as they grow on inputs.  Fortunately, the
operations for input and output only require (besides addition)
multiplication by terms which are almost invariably small.  (I have
not seen a term exceed 20776 except in specially constructed numbers.)
It is fairly safe, then to declare any function which has gotten
(Outside -2^35 2^35) to be infinite, thus terminating its continued
fraction.  Better still, note that the term 20776 is equivalent to the
terms 20000 0 700 0 70 0 6, i.e., a very large term can be transmitted
piecewise.  Although this is just thinly disguised multiprecision
multiplication, that first piece of the term will probably satisfy its
recipient for quite some time.

In some special cases, the integer variables will become
periodic rather than large, especially when all by one of the
arguments to a function have terminated.  Then, we have the form

       a x + b
z(x) = ------- ,
       c x + d

known as a homographic function.  If ad-bc is +-1,
then a, b, c, d will eventually
become 1, 0, 0, 1, whereupon z will output the terms of
x unmodified.  Periodicity will also occur when x is
a Hurwitz number, i.e., when the terms of x are the
values of one or more polynomials evaluated on consecutive integers
and then interleaved.  Coth 1/69, sqrt(105), and e are Hurwitz
numbers whose polynomials are linear or constant.  Hurwitzness is
preserved by homographic functions.  If one can show that pi is
a Hurwitz number, one confirms the long standing conjectures that
e*pi, e+pi, e/pi, etc.  are
all irrational.

If z, x, and y are all regular, then it
generally won't be possible to reduce z by finding a GCD of
a through h which is > 1.  However, it has been
determined empirically that much reduction is often possible in other
cases.  This reduction is almost always by a divisor of an input or
output term numerator (or 10 if output is decimal digits) and can be
facilitated by keeping certain of the integer variables around modulo
these quantities.

ITEM 101C (Gosper):

Problem: Given an interval, find in it the rational number with the
smallest numerator and denominator.

Solution: Express the endpoints as continued fractions.  Find the
first term where they differ and add 1 to the lesser term, unless it's
last.  Discard the terms to the right.  What's left is the continued
fraction for the "smallest" rational in the interval.  (If one
fraction terminates but matches the other as far as it goes, append an
infinity and proceed as above.)
